Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
And welcome back.
Let's now go ahead and install Apache Tomcat, which we said is a servlet container and can also act
as a web server.
So we have to go here, Tomcat dot, Apache dot org.
So this is the Apache Tomcat site and it is offered by the Apache Software Foundation, which also has
many other open source projects.
And Apache Tomcat is one of them.
As we can see here.
It says it's an open source implementation of all of these specifications, like the Java servlet,
Java server pages, Java expression, language and so on.
And here at the left, we have the different downloads.
So Tomcat nine is the latest version.
Here it is if we scroll down so we can see the different versions here.
So mine is a 64 bit windows.
So I have clicked on this and I have downloaded the ZAP.
Now if you're using some other operating system like Linux or Mac OS, you can click on this one.
That should be good.
Now.
I have already downloaded that.
So once you zip, once you download the zip, just unzip it and you will see a folder there.
Tomcat folder of Apache Tomcat folder.
So just copy that folder into onto your hard disk.
So I have done that.
In my case I have copied into my C drive.
So here it is.
This is the latest version, 9.0. 12.
And I also have different versions here.
The older ones too, like Tomcat seven.
So this is what we have.
And if I double click on this, it has many other subfolders, so we need to start Tomcat in order to
access any websites hosted on Tomcat.
But before we do that, before we can start it here, there is the bin folder.
In the bin folder, there are different executables and you can see here that it says Startup Dot,
batch, windows batch file.
So this is what we will click in order to start Tomcat on Windows.
Now if you're using Mac or Linux, you would use the startup shell script.
This is the one.
But the thing that is important is before you do this, you have to ensure that the Java underscore
home environment variable is set.
Now in one of the earlier beginning sections, we have shown how that can be done on a Windows machine,
how Java underscore home environment variable can be set.
So I'm sure you know that.
And for Linux and Mac also, we had a lecture where we have shown how to set class path environment
variable.
So for Java underscore home also it would be a similar process.
We have shown it for on Mac, but it's the same process for Linux too.
So in my machine it's a window.
So if I go into control panel and.
Here system.
I'm just showing you once again, advanced system settings.
Here it is under the advanced tab.
Click on environment variables.
And here it is.
So I have Java underscore home.
If it's not there, go ahead and click on new and enter Java underscore how home and also the path to
the JDK, the root directory of JDK.
So that should do.
If you do not do that, then you cannot start Tomcat.
So that's it.
So this is the bin folder and it has all of these different executables.
In order to shut down, we click on this shutdown batch file executable.
So let me just go back.
So that's the bin folder.
Then we have the conf folder which has some configuration files and we are going to edit one of them.
Library will have the different jar files.
For instance, here the servlet API is for the servlet library and if you also need any other third
party libraries, you can also add it here.
And the important one here is web apps.
So within the Web apps folder, we will deploy our web applications.
So if you create a web application, you would copy it here.
And if you have more than one web application, all of those web applications will be copied here.
Later, in a subsequent lecture, we will see how that can be done because we are going to deploy a
web application.
So that's what the web apps and like we have all the libraries and losses.
If there are any errors on Tomcat, then you can find those error messages in the log files here.
So that's what it is.
And let's not worry about work for now.
So one thing I would say is let's go into conf and let me open this file called server dot xml.
Let me open it with notepad plus plus.
So here it's an XML file and if we scroll down here under server here, so there is this connector port
is 88, you can leave it as 88 but looks like how some other version of Tomcat which is running on 88
on this port number.
So this is the TCP port number.
So I'm going to use this four nines.
You can also do that on a production system.
You can have it as a RT, which is the default port for HTTP.
Now if you use this number, you would have to include the port number in the web address.
So let's keep it like that.
Now, let's go ahead and just start.
Tomcat.
So let's go back here into the bin directory and let me just click on Startup.
That said, it has started.
Now, let me go here and let me just say.
Local host.
It's already here, let me say.
Nine, nine, nine.
Local host.
Colon, the port number, which is nine.
Nine, nine.
If you see the screen, it means that installation is successful.
If not, maybe there is some issue with the port number.
Maybe you also have some other Tomcat instance running on that port, or maybe some minor issue which
you can Google and find out.
So that's the thing.
But if you see this screen, it means that everything is working fine.
And localhost, you would do this when you are testing on your local machine.
And instead of this, you can also say 127.
.0.0.1.
It's an IP address for localhost and that would also be fine.
But on a server you would use the IP address of the server or you can also or even here you can use
the IP address of this particular machine and that would also work fine.
But normally when you're developing, you would just say localhost and you would use a port number if
there is any.
And that's it.
So that's how you would install Tomcat.
And thank you.